NEC PC-9821 machine (``pc98``)
==============================

The ``pc98`` machine models a NEC PC-9821, the 32-bit member of the PC-98
family of Japanese personal computers.  It boots the machine's own ROM BIOS
(ITF + BIOS) and runs PC-98 MS-DOS and PC-98 applications.

The PC-98 is x86-based but is **not** a PC/AT compatible: the interrupt
controller cascade, the timer clock, the I/O port map, the A20 behaviour, the
disk BIOS geometry and the text/graphics hardware all differ from the AT.  The
machine therefore derives from ``TYPE_X86_MACHINE`` directly rather than from
the PC/AT board code, and its devices live in their own files.

## Firmware

The machine needs the target ROM images, which are not shipped with QEMU.
Point ``-L`` at a directory containing them.  Either layout is accepted:

* one file per 32 KiB ROM bank: ``pc98bank0.bin`` .. ``pc98bank7.bin``; or
* the split dumps ``pc98itf.bin`` (32 KiB) and ``pc98bios.bin`` (96 KiB).

The ITF and the three main BIOS banks are mandatory; ``pc98pci.bin`` and
``pc98ide.bin`` are optional.  The text font ``pc98font.bin`` is required for
display output.

Note
----

The high-resolution timer that later PC-9821 models expose (a free-running
1/32-second counter kept in the BIOS work area) is **not implemented yet**.  A
**PC-9801 BIOS** image should therefore be used; a PC-9821 BIOS that depends
on this timer may not run correctly for now.

Running
-------

With the firmware in ``<romdir>`` and a bootable floppy image::

```
qemu-system-i386 -M pc98 -L <romdir> -drive if=floppy,format=raw,file=dos.img
```

```
ls roms
pc98bios.bin  pc98font.bin  pc98ide.bin  pc98itf.bin
```

Supported devices
-----------------

* One 486-class CPU (uniprocessor).
* Interrupt controllers: a master/slave 8259A pair with the cascade on IRQ 7
  (the PC/AT uses IRQ 2), reachable at the stride-2 PC-98 ports.
* Interval timer: 8253/8254 clocked at 2.4576 MHz.
* DMA: a single 8237-style controller with the PC-98 page/bank-boundary and
  1 MiB-wrap semantics.
* Keyboard: 8251-style serial keyboard on IRQ 1.
* System port: uPD4990A calendar clock (IRQ 15), the system and printer 8255
  PPIs, a time-stamp counter and the software DIP switches.
* Floppy: uPD765A controller with the 1 MB (IRQ 11, DMA 2) and 640 KB
  (IRQ 10, DMA 3) interfaces; 1.2 MB (1024-byte sector) 2HD media.
* Built-in IDE (IRQ 9): two channels multiplexed onto one register block,
  addressed with the PC-98 fixed 8-head / 17-sector BIOS geometry.
* Display: uPD7220 (GDC) text and graphics with the GRCG, EGC and PEGC
  blitters, and the 8/16-colour planar and 256-colour packed modes.

Disks
-----

Floppies use the usual ``if=floppy`` interface::

```
qemu-system-i386 -M pc98 -L <romdir> -drive if=floppy,format=raw,file=dos.img
```

Hard disks use the PC-98-specific ``if=ide98`` interface.  This keeps the
PC-98 IDE out of QEMU's generic geometry auto-detection: the PC-98 IDE BIOS
always addresses a disk as 8 heads / 17 sectors per track, so images must be
partitioned for that geometry::

```
qemu-system-i386 -M pc98 -L <romdir> -drive if=ide98,format=raw,file=hdd.raw
```

A host directory can be exposed as a PC-98-formatted read/write FAT disk with
the ``fat98`` block driver (a PC-98 variant of ``fat:``)::

```
qemu-system-i386 -M pc98 -L <romdir> -drive if=ide98,unit=1,format=raw,file=fat98:rw:/path/to/dir
```

Limitations
-----------

Not yet implemented:

- sound
- bus mouse
- serial ports
- networking
- EMS
- high-resolution timer (see the firmware note above)
- migration/savevm
- SMP
- WAB linear-framebuffer

The Window Accelerator Board (WAB) linear-framebuffer device is planned for
later.
